thanks again everyone for coming back
laszlo montgomery here with part five of
this
handy vest pocket guide to the history
of the jewish refugees
in china during the first half of the
20th century
well between the time hitler became
chancellor of germany in 1933
up to about 1941 as many as
30 000 jews had managed to make their
way to the city of shanghai
most via lloyd tristino cruise ships
departing from italy
the trans-siberian railway and by any
other means possible
some use shanghai as a jumping off point
to other destinations
but for most shanghai was where they
decided to tough it out
by 1941 china had already admitted more
jewish refugees than
canada australia new zealand south
africa
and india combined as we get closer to
december 7th 1941
the numbers pretty much start to set
and those jews who didn't get out of
europe in time prepared for the worst
i wanted to start off this episode by
speaking about one other person
i mentioned khufangshan in part three
the one i'd like to introduce now was
another diplomat
who offered a lifeline to a group of
jews who
might not have considered shanghai
before but now saw it as their final
hope
the man his name was sukihara chiyoni
he had quite a life he was a graduate
from the harbin gakuin
japan's training ground for future
soviet experts of which
sugihara was won he was the government
official who led the deal team that
negotiated the north manchurian railway
away from the soviets and was director
of the foreign ministry in manchukuo
he was fluent in russian in november
two months into the war he was sent to
covino lithuania to go
keep an eye on the russians and germans
there and
report back to tokyo on any useful intel
going on in the baltic states
and he became the first japanese
diplomat posted to lithuania
becoming the japanese vice council in
the capital
kanas while he was serving there
in june of 1940 the soviets occupied
lithuania and the jews there started
feeling the heat
almost at once they had hitler to the
west and stalin to the east
talk about a rock and a hard place so
that summer of 1940
the jews of lithuania including a lot of
polish jews who had escaped to lithuania
traveled to konos and in the lithuanian
capital
yeah it was just like vienna in late
1938 right after crystal knocked
jews there begin knocking on the doors
of every consulate in town looking for a
visa
and on one july morning in 1940 sukihara
chiyuni
looked out his window and saw what was
going on with all the
desperation in the streets he didn't
have any clear-cut
instructions from tokyo strictly
prohibiting the issuing of visas
so he went to work started churning them
out and got about as many as 1800 visas
issued before he got orders from above
to stop issuing them unless the
applicant had been properly screened
to ensure they had sufficient funds to
cover their own costs in japan
and that they wouldn't be a burden on
the government
so he kept on going or whether or not
these desperate jews had the kind of
savings to satisfy the japanese
authorities
sugihara didn't ask in time the soviets
stepped in and put the kibash on these
10-day transit visas that sugihara
chione was issuing
but for a while some soviet capitalists
were okay running a racket that offered
these jews
who had received these visas a seat on
the trans-siberian vladivostok at five
times the face value of the ticket
then once they arrived at the end of the
line they would catch passage to kobe
and then from kobe later on to shanghai
but in 1941
it was over another unsung hero from
this time was tedious romer
a polish diplomat who served as
ambassador to japan for a stint
he worked on the tokyo side to assist
these jews who were able to get to japan
with the help of sugihara chione
he was able to get many of these
arrivals resettled in various countries
and was the key man in getting most of
these jewish refugees
to shanghai this was from august 1940
to november 1941.
he got about 2140 of those visas
issued before he couldn't do it anymore
there were an additional 300 children
also covered by many of these visas one
of the more
famous stories of escape attributed to
the efforts of sugihara chione was his
role in rescuing all 400 or so members
of the
mir yeshiva a yeshiva that's a jewish
school
to put it mildly the curriculum back in
those days
heavy on torah and talmud light on the
social studies and science
anyway all these yeshivas all over
germany and
central and eastern europe they were all
shut down and the students and teachers
not skilled in anything productive in
the eyes of the nazis
ended up in concentration camps but one
of these schools got away
the mir yeshiva as the name suggests
they're originally from mir
which today is in belarus but mir was
one of those places that had
changed hands over the centuries used to
be in the duchy of lithuania
then the polish lithuanian commonwealth
then the russian empire before it went
back to poland
then the soviet union took it over in
1939 and then in 1941
mir was overrun by the nazis and with
this state of affairs
it wasn't a good environment for any
yeshiva so along with
approximately 2 000 or so polish jews
the entire faculty
and student body of the mere yeshiva
first fled to lithuania
and were fortunate to escape the
holocaust by finding refuge
ultimately in shanghai and they got to
shanghai thanks to sugihara shiyuni
they were part of the 2000 plus polish
and lithuanian jews who arrived in
shanghai
via japan and survived the holocaust
today the mere yeshiva is bigger and
better than ever
largest yeshiva in the world i dare say
and based in the historic city of
jerusalem
they were the only eastern european
yeshiva
to survive the nazis it's hard to say
how many jews were saved by
sugihara chione's actions so many of the
visas he issued
covered whole families not just a single
person
the simon wiesenthal center puts their
estimate at about 6
000 jews saved and that more than 40 000
are alive today
as descendants of these polish and
lithuanian jews issued these visas by
sukihata
their stories about how even after the
lithuanian consulate was shuttered
tsugiharacione kept writing these 10-day
transit visas
he did them by hand from his hotel room
at the metropolis
still there today he issued each day
what he'd normally
process in a month like function in
vienna
years earlier he did this up until the
last day he was present in konas
as for sugihara he was transferred to
prague
and then to bucharest until the end of
the war after ve day
he fell into soviet hands and lived
under house arrest for years
he was repatriated back to japan in 1947
and took an early retirement he put his
russian fluency to work and took
employment with a japanese trading firm
as their
moscow rep from 1960 to 1975
and like huffington and oscar schindler
who saved
so many thousands of jews during such a
dark hour
sugihara chione was also recognized by
yad vashem
the world holocaust remembrance center
is righteous among nations
the ceremony honoring him was held in
israel in january 1985.
at the ceremony he spoke about his
reasons for helping the
jewish refugees who came to him and he
said quote
you want to know about my motivation
don't you well
just the kind of sentiments anyone would
have when he actually sees refugees
face to face begging with tears in their
eyes
he just cannot help but sympathize with
them among the refugees
were the elderly and women they were
so desperate that they went so far as to
kiss my shoes
yes i actually witnessed such scenes
with my own eyes
also i felt at the time that the
japanese government did not have any
uniform opinion in tokyo some japanese
military leaders were just scared
because of
the pressure from the nazis while other
officials in the home ministry
were simply ambivalent people in tokyo
were not united
i felt it silly to deal with them so i
made up my mind
not to wait for their reply i knew that
somebody would surely complain about me
in the future but i myself
thought this would be the right thing to
do there's nothing wrong in
saving many people's lives the spirit of
humanity
philanthropy neighborly friendship with
this spirit
i ventured to do what i did confronting
this most
difficult decision and because of this
reason i went ahead
with redoubled courage end quote
1900 to 1986. so on the eve of pearl
harbor something like an additional 20
european ashkenazi jews of all shapes
and sizes and circumstances
had managed to squeeze themselves into
shanghai
overwhelmingly they were german austrian
lithuanian and polish
every one of them carried with them a
similar story of
persecution and horror a narrow escape
and leaving loved ones behind
you know october 23rd 1941 a month and a
half before pearl harbor
the germans prohibited jewish emigration
they figured
they had given the jews long enough to
get out right around that time
late 1941 and into 1942
the nazis started rounding jewish people
up and began transporting them to the
concentration camps
no more shanghai option for anyone
anymore
by the time of the early 1940s the
jewish community of shanghai had
organized itself
and though none of the refugees had it
easy
they all had a safety net those who
couldn't afford a rat infested tenement
for their family to cram themselves into
found residency in these shelters called
jaime
german for home about two thousand three
thousand of the jewish refugees
lived in these shelters six to a 150 per
room depending on the shelter
besides the residents of these highmen
there were
thousands of others who daily filed in
and out for a hot meal but
maintain lodging elsewhere by late 1939
more than half of the jewish refugees in
shanghai relied on financial assistance
just to get by
and sleep with a roof over their heads
considering what was happening to
european jewry about this time
these hardships and the anguish endured
by these jewish refugees was trivial
they all didn't speak with one voice and
not everyone got along
and there were plenty of arguments but
overall as it is with other communities
be it armenian nigerian egyptian
chinese or any other the ones who came
before
and who had found success rose to the
occasion to assist those of their kind
who came after cap in hand
the japanese bombing of pearl harbor and
their takeover of the pacific rim all
the way to burma
changed the dynamic profoundly all these
years going back to the marco polo
bridge incident
in july 1937 everyone knew what japan
was up to in china but everyone kept up
appearances and outwardly appeared
neutral in front of japan
and in return japan too kept up
appearances
where they could have put their foot
down they looked the other way
and not until the situation got out of
control in mid-1939 to japan mind one
way or another about the european jews
using shanghai as a place of refuge now
things were different
was a new chapter in the history of
world war ii
all the cards were on the table now no
need for niceties or anything like that
on december 8th 1941 the japanese took
over the city of shanghai
including the international settlement
and french concession
all allies that is british french and
americans
into the internment camps they went just
like in steven spielberg's empire the
sun featuring
my very own doppelganger john malkovich
in one of his greatest roles
i mentioned the jdc in part two i think
the joint distribution committee
based in new york they acted as the
funnel that
directed funds to jews in need all over
the world
they had their work cut out for them in
shanghai before we move on i
wanted to stress again how critical the
jdc
was all this time especially to the most
desperate refugees
and i only wanted to mention another
hero from these years
heroine actually laura l margolis
you can read up on the details of her
story quite an extraordinary woman
especially for the
times she lived in the kind of mountains
she moved to help many of the jewish
refugees in shanghai
it would have been impossible to most of
us
the jdc sent her to shanghai to go deal
with this crisis
she sailed there alone i mean it was
probably nothing for her but
in 1941 it still wasn't so commonplace
where you'd see a woman traveling
overseas
unaccompanied as soon as she arrived in
shanghai
april 1941 she was joined by another
hero in our story
manny siegel and these two from the jdc
hit the ground running and over the next
six months got an entire operation
organized
in place that provided assistance to the
most
vulnerable of the 20 or so thousand jews
living hard in the
hong kong district of shanghai laura
margolis
this name that probably means nothing to
many of you not an a-lister from the
history of this time but in the
history of the jewish refugees in
shanghai
she gets top billing there were many
among the jewish refugees
or shanghailanders as they called
themselves
who stepped up and took a lead role in
caring for the community as a whole
so laura margolis she and manny siegel
they were veterans at the jdc so they
know how to do their job well
and after a while everything was fine
until december 8th
1941 and then it wasn't after the
u.s declared war on japan the lines of
communication were cut
between china and the u.s and
organizations like the jdc
that relied on overseas funding
found that funding cut off and with so
many lives at stake and now
everything turned on its head people had
to improvise
and this included the jdc who still had
to find a way to keep thousands of
families
above the waterline this hit the jdc
hard
you know in the aid business funding is
pretty important
all overseas relief funds relief
supplies
all was now prohibited banking nobody
could send or receive money
so laura margolis had to make things up
as she went along and you know
december january 1941 1942
and the japanese were kind of busy and
their jewish problem
was not high up on the list of
priorities she was able to work
something out with the
japanese authorities in shanghai whereby
they allowed
laura margolis to get around the
prohibitions and be allowed to get
access to funds
that could keep the soup kitchens going
in return for facilitating this
exception to the rules put in place
the japanese told laura margolis this
whole
jewish refugee mess consider it yours
you administer it the more i read about
laura margolis the more i realized that
to have
the lives of thousands suddenly thrown
in your lap and to become responsible
for them
and ensure no one fell through the
cracks no biggie for her
by february 1942 though they had run out
of money and because the war was now
raging around the world
theirs was just one of millions of
problems
by then there were about 8 000 jewish
refugees living day to day and just
getting by thanks to the rations doled
out by the jdc funded soup kitchens
when it came to the end laura had to be
the bad guy
who cut those 8 000 rations into 4 000
and only the most vulnerable would be
taken care of
women children the sick the elderly
the jdc funded clinics ran out of
supplies
patients suffered or perished only the
most
necessary of necessities of life if they
could be afforded
were to be had so by this time
early 1942 freezing cold
shanghai the world at war with the jdc
running on fumes the word went out to
the jewish community in shanghai
all over hong kong and those jews
who still kept a little something hidden
away for a rainy day
they all knew that they had come and it
was upon them
and enough money was pooled to keep the
kitchens going
another week 1942-43
you'd think the jewish refugees had seen
the worst with hitler and the nazis but
1942-43 there was a lot of suffering
a lot of death more than 700 jews died
just in those
two years and all those upper class and
more well-off jews who had
lived all these years in the french
concession now we're
scrimping and saving like everyone else
not living so large like the good old
days
laura margolis and manny siegel somehow
they managed to keep things going
until february 1943 when they both got
interned in some
camp by then all the heaviest lifting
had been taken care of and things were
in place sufficiently enough where
they're not being present and bring
things to a halt
they had solved the financing problem by
sending warriors through banks and
neutral countries in
south america and switzerland the
japanese
repatriated laura margolis to the states
in september 1943 and manny siegel after
the war ended
when she got back to america laura got
the word out about what was happening in
shanghai
and she went on to other posts for the
joint distribution committee after the
war ended
in france first laura margolis died
september
9th 1997 and at the new york
headquarters of the jdc there's a plaque
there that
commemorates her work in shanghai and
all the places she served she lived to
something to be said for that anyway
back to our story while laura was doing
her good work in 1942
into this miserable time for the jewish
people
all huddled together in shanghai came
joseph albert mizinger
he was head of the gestapo in the far
east in poland they knew him as the
butcher of warsaw
he was head of the gestapo there and was
directly responsible for the death
of tens of thousands of poles
so he rolled into shanghai in the summer
of 42
july 1942. he came to shanghai from
japan
rumors surrounded the reasons for his
visit
jews who were aware of what was going on
knew whatever it was it wasn't going to
be good for them
considering meisinger's reputation
and his rank in the gestapo the word
spread fast
and the wildest rumors began to surface
about
what he had in store for the jews of
shanghai
two of the more popular rumors was that
meisinger was gonna
herd all the jewish refugees onto
vessels and
sail them offshore and sink them or that
jews were going to be
rounded up and shipped off to some
deserted island left to perish
at this point anything was believable as
far as the jews were concerned
mizinger's visit surely had something to
do with
encouraging his japanese allies to get
on the
final solution ban way and be a little
less accommodating to
all these jews living in shanghai he let
them know germany's position
regarding allowing jews refuge in
shanghai and that they should
be sent back to germany there was even a
rumor that
he had brought a canister of zyklon b
with him
in his meetings with japanese consular
officials
military police and the japanese bureau
of jewish affairs
mizinger offered germany's technical
and other kinds of assistance in dealing
with the jews in shanghai
japan had only to ask
you know there's a story i read well it
was never proven but i'll tell it anyway
true or not it was a great anecdote from
the time
it concerns one of the most revered
hasidic rabies
shimon sholum kalish after meisinger had
left
the japanese military governor who had
hosted him
called an informal meeting of jewish
community leaders and
rabbi kalish was among them so the
jewish official
had heard an earful from colonel
mizinger and now he was curious to hear
from the jews
what their side of the story was so at
some point in the meeting
japanese military governor turned to
rebbe kalish and asked him
why do the germans hate you jews so much
and reby kalish
not too much writing on his answer
except the possible fate of over twenty
thousand jews
looked right back at him and said they
hate us because we are orientals
well again whether or not this story is
true
isn't known but the japanese ended up
not
acceding to the german's request to deal
with the jews
in a certain manner they didn't single
them out for persecution
for their own reasons the japanese
government
or the military killing the jews wasn't
part of their mission
but neither did they leave them be
whether it was
pressure from germany or perhaps
throwing hitler a bone
in october 1942 the japanese issued an
edict that ordered
all enemy nationals over 13 to wear a
bright
red cotton armband with the first letter
of their nationality
and a registration number of sorts then
on november 15
1942 the idea of a ghetto
or restricted area was approved
and then on february 18 1943
a week to the day before the birth of
george harrison and the sacred
city of liverpool the japanese
authorities
ordered all stateless refugees who had
reached shanghai
after january 1st 1937
to all move to a certain area
inside the hong kong district and this
became known as the shanghai ghetto
and we're gonna look at that next
episode please do come back for that one
hello gold mountain this is the fifth
time i'm telling you about it and i'm
gonna remind you again next episode
this is a piece written by wufei
multi-instrumentalist
vocalist and all-around wonderful person
she will be performing this piece
written for the chinese gujeong and the
jewish ode
two instruments that will symbolize the
chinese and jewish people and their
shared history during the 1930s and 40s
in shanghai
when all the stuff i've been introducing
to you was happening
shinier ezra bloom and crayons on the
ode and the whole
chatterbird ensemble rounding out what
is sure to be a meaningful and
beautiful evening of musica in the
musical capital of these united states
nashville tennessee hello
goldmountain.com
one and all and if you think i'm not
going to mention himalaya again i
am i find my podcast load faster than
ever
i've gotten used to the interface and
hey i'm hooked baby
their new playlist feature is real nice
go check out the himalaya app and the
google or apple stores
i'm telling you himalaya.fm for details
and
app download links podcast creators
you might want to check them out for
hosting options and the ways you can
monetize your precious content go talk
to the himalaya people
i was at an event the other night at the
old
biltmore hotel downtown la china
southern airways put this one out
a lot of cz top brass were present from
guangzhou
anyway in the lucky draw i want a round
tripper on this new
china southern route they just started
running between la and shenyang
departs lax tom bradley 12 40 am
arriving shenyang five in the morning
the next day
a quickie less than 11 hours so i won
this freebie to shanyang
i spent my 35th birthday there i'll
never forget it
it was freezing outside and i couldn't
leave my hotel so here's what i was
thinking
i was going to wait of course till the
summer of 2019 and fly to shanyang and
maybe
do a little lounging vacation chanyang
and dalian
i'll stay a week any longing listeners
who want to meet up for some noodles or
a bottle of chair
drop me a line at laszlo at tcup.media
we'll arrange a place to meet up lax to
shenyang
three times a week i'll let you know how
it is it's an economy class ticket i won
so i'll have to bring my neck pillow and
plenty of ambien
so i'm hoping at least one of you
millions of chp listeners out there will
reach out and join me for my little
liaoning journey
congrats to longtime listeners richard
and audrey mann on the
birth of baby abigail way to go kongshi
neman
well that's it we only paid for a half
hour here at the record plant west
they're kicking me out lazla montgomery
signing off from
fantastic la wishing everyone all the
best
if it wasn't for you who'd listen to
this show
let's make it a date in two weeks time
for another exciting episode
of the china history podcast
you